Why azure--
it provides 100+ services. jobopeningsare there.easy touse.

Compute,networking,security,storage,database,serverless,mgmt,pricing

Fundamentals of cloud compuitng--

Cloud deployment models--

Service models--

Regions and avilabltiy zonesin azure--

Creating an account in azure--


Module Overview--Azure
Azure virtual m/cs--
azure app services 
Azure container instances--
azure functions
azure kubernetes service

Virtualm/c--these gives u more control over the computing environment.
U can choose diff configurations.Runur instance in multiple locations.
Easy to use gui tomonitor the state ofur vms.

Resources related to VMs--
Before connecting VM, resource groups must exist.
This is necessary bcoz a new vm must be contained inside
reource group.
U can deploy vm using both managed and unmanaged disk.

for remote access we will need internet.

Azure security services part1--
Azure security center,azure key vault,azure monitor logs.

Azure security center--it is kind of a security mgmt system.Secure both cloud and on-premise.
getrecommendations.

Azure key vault--store and manage secrets,kys and certificates.
U can alsouse it as key mgmt system as encryptionkeys toencrypt your data.

Azure monitor logs--collects data to monitor your logs.
Perform automated actions.

VM pricingoptions--
pay as u go--u pay forwhat u use.
reserved instances--customers can commit tousing ec2 overa 1 to3 year term.used forsteady-state usage
spot pricing--purchase unused computecapacity.Good optionif u r running ineruptible apps.

VM options--
6 diff types--
generalpurpose-bal cpu/memory ratio.used for development and testingenvironmnets
compute optimizd--higher cpu/memor ratio.good for medium traffic web servers nd batch processing.
memory optimized--higher memory/core ratio.Used whenusing RDBMS ,largecache and forperforminglargeinmemorycomputations.
Storagoptimized--high disk throughputand IO. BigData, SQLandNoSQL databases
GPU-for heavy rendering and video editing
high performance compute vms--fastest cpus,for finncial risk,etc

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes

Availability sets vs availability zones--
unexpected downtime,unplanned hw maintenanace,planned hw mainenance
Availabilty sets provideavailability and rdundancy -atleast 3 m/cs are deployed.Azure guaranteesthat 99.95% of the time,mc will be
available.
Every VMwhich isdeployed in availabilityset gets a updatedomainand afaultdomain by azure.
update domain areagroup of vms that can be rebootedat the sametime.

An availability setcontains 5 update domain by default. And ucanincrease itupto 20.
A fault domain isagroupof vms which share comn powersource and n/w switch.

Availability zones--
Undr any azure regiontherecan be multiple availability zone.Andthey have this physical seperation.
Availability zone protects app from data centerr failure where as availabily set protect opfrom h/w failure.


How to launch vm on azure----
Subscription is like a project on azure.U can always manage ur resources ,ans ur servicesin azure at a single place called subscription.
By default azure has created a free tier subscription for us.

Click on home--->dashboard--->virtual machines--->+create--->+virtual machines---->
project deatils--subsciption--->currently we have only free trial.Resource group-->name-- vm-demos--->ok

instance details---
vmname-- vm-demo-1
region-- (US)East US (free services eligible)
Availability options--- u want ur m/cto be available in single availability zones or multiple availability zones.
---- Availability zone
Availabitlity zone-- Zone 1
Security type-- Standard
Image (of the os that we want on hte VM)-- by default Ubuntu
Azure Spot Instance--(u want ur vm on a discounted rate or u want pay asu go version)-- unchecked
Size-- Standard_D2s_v-2vcpus,8 GiBmemory(5048.93/month)
Auth type (how do u want people or any other VM to connect to ur VM)-- SSH public key
Username-- azureuser
SSH public key source--generate new key pair-- key pair name-- vm-demo-1_key (by default it is taken as the vm name)
inbound port rules--do u want anyone to access vm or u want to limit someone on the vm-- so
public inbound ports-- none

next: disks---
os disk type--standard ssd(locally redundant storage)
check delete with vm

next:Management>
next:Advanced >
next: Tags> u can give any tags overhere and this is forur requirement.
lets saywhats the usage of this vm---so name - usage, value - demo

review + create-------------create------------  download private key and create resource---save this on ur m/c.

after vm is deployed--- go to resource

demo 2--runnning vm-1
before launching we willdo certain changes on networking options.
so, search for networking--
here we are going to allow any ip addr to access our vm and access any ports onit.
we will include this in inbound port rules.
in outbound port rules-- any ip addr or any mc can listen to any port in this vm.

so,click on inbound rules-- add inbound rules--
source - any
source port ranges- *
destination - any
destination port ranges - *
name (before description)- AllInboundAccess
-- add this inbound rule.

Outbound port rules--Ad outbounb port rule--
source - any
destination port ranges- *
name - AllOutboundAccess--- Add

now,in search on right-- overview--
click on connect---ssh---- window user-- click on putty---- copy cmd on 2 i.e. chmod 400 azureuser.pem
on the right top--click on terminal sign--
$ navigate to the dir where ur private window is.
lets say--
$ cd Desktop
$ chmod 400 azureuser.pem----- change azureuser to the name of ur private key i.e.
$chmod 400 vm-demo-1_key.pem

now 4. copy cmd----- paste on terminal.
$ ssh -i vm-demo-1_key.pem azureuser@20.42.97.129

yes

now installing jupyter here.
$python3
>>>exit()
nowinstalling jupyer notebook.
$sudo apt-get update---------------------------to update all the packages
$sudo apt install jupyer-notebook
yes
$ jupyter-notebook --ip 0.0.0.0 --no-browser

copy the link---paste it on browser and replace 127.0.0.1 with the public ip addr wich 
u will get from overview. eg 20.42.97.129
press enter


 

Azure compute options---
Demo-3 deleting vm-1-----go back to dashboard---virtual machines---
--select the vm-demo-1----------------click delete----yes----

Azure Networking Options----
Basic concepts of networking part1------
Public and private n/w---
public n/w -- simple internet
private n/w-- company's private n/w.

internet gaeway-- we may have many n/ws and  we want to send data from 1 n/w to another.
So gateway is a device used to connect 1 n/w to another.It is the stopping point for the data
when data travles from 1 n/w to another where it blocks the unwanted traffic to enter the n/w.

If from gateway we are connecting to inernet then it is internet gateway.

If u have a wifi conee at ur home,ur internet gateway is the modem that ur isb provides.

ip addr--it is a unique addr that identifies a device on the internet or on a localn/w.

192.158,.2.20
its a 32 bit no.-- divided into 4 parts. 
8 bits-- 0-255
ip addr value can range from 0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255

this version is for ipv4.We also have ipv6.
N/w--host
classA,B,C,D

Public ip addr is divided into 2 parts.---Dynamic and Static
For, dynamic ip addr keeps on changing automatically and on a regular basis.
So ip addr providers buy large no.of ip addresses and assign it automatically to their customers
On the other hand, static ip addr remains unchanged.

Subnets--Division of n/w is done into smaller subnets.using this pkt travels shorter dist without 
unnecessary  travel.

cidr--it is an ip addressing scheme that improves the allocation of ip addresses and replaces the old system
based on classes A,B and C.Class A- 16million+ hosts, Class B-- 65,535 hosts, class c-254 hosts.

Nowif u rusing class c ip addr and u want 300 hosts then u willhave touse class B n/w andrest 65235 hosts willbe wasted.
cidr can have variable length of ip addr.It is divided into 2 parts.eg-- 192.158.2.20/20--- 1st part is ip addr and 2 nd part is
number of bits of n/w addr.                        |
i.e. 192.158.2.20/20====> 1100 0000.1001 1110.0000 |0010.1100 0000
on the left n/w addr and on right hosts addr. i.e. 1st 20 bits for n/w next 12 for hosts.

Route tables--this contains the set of rules and necessary info to fwd a packet along the best path toward its destination.

route table cals all the routes and returns the best ones.
It contains rules to fwd the received pkts to the best path.

Virtual Networks_Communications---
A vn in azure has improved availability,scalabilty and u donot need to manage any hardware.
VN are the foundations on which many of the other azure services are built.VNs can be connected to on-premise resources
These can also access internet.

The purpose of vns is toallow Azure resources to securely communicate with internet with other azure services deployed in other VNs.
and with the h/w that are deployed on on-premise envir.

Now,understanding how these 3 comms takes place.
So,by default all resources that are connected to ur vn,can communicate oubound to the internet.
Outbound means ur vm will be able to send req to the public internet. To enable inbound comm from the internet tothe azure resource,
it is necessarry that ur azure resource should have a public ip addr or a public load balancer provision to it.
Load balancer is a device that is able to distribute ur n/w traffic to the available resource.

Then,how resources inside VNs communicate to other azure services.
Some of the resources like vms ,scalesets,app service environmnets if deployed on a single vn will be able to communicate with
each other securely.
Apart from that,if u r coneeccting to other storage accounts or sql databases,then u will require the help of azure service endpoints.
Service endpoints allows to secure ur resources toonly a vn. The azure service endpoints alows u to extend ur vn  private addr space and identify 
to certain other azure resources.When u want the resources in ur vn to communicate with resources in other vns, then u will require vNet Peering.
This way we can connec two vns together.

If u already have some resources on ur on-premise envir, then there are multiple ways for the azure resource to connect to them.
1.Point-to-SiteVPN.2.Site-to-Site VPN.3.Express Gateway

1.Point-to-Site VPN--It allows toestablish a connection between a single comp in uron-premise n/w and a vn.
In case instead of single comp,uhave many onpremise resources,then use site-to-site vpn.
If u want a more robust conn betw VN and on-premise resources, then u need express route connection.
It is the private conn betw ur on-premise n/w and ur azure enviro.
Here the traffic doesnot flow over the internet.

So,for comm with internet, the outbound is enabled by defualt.And for inbound comm either the resource should have some public ip addror
it should be associated with some public load balancer.
-then to commm between azure services, we can either use azure service endpoints or vNet Peering.
-finally to comm with on-premise resources, we can use point-to-site,site-to-site VPN.Or in case 
u want amore dedicated line-- use express route.

Creating azure Virtual Networks--
azure home---search virtual n/w --- there might be a few default virtualn/ws that might be created for u by azure.
Creating a new one---- click on + create----- 1st we will give project name and resource group.
subscription--- free trial---
resource group-- vm-demos
name--virtual-network-demo
next step--------------------
public ip addr--ipv4 cidr addr---
10.4.0.0/16 ---- 10.4.0.0-10.4.255.255(for 16 bit n/w wehave 65536 hostaddresses)

now we can always change this no.Lets say we change it to 22.So 22 bits will be used for the addr now.
and remining for resources. So we have 1024 n/wadresses which we can assign---
u can also goto website--
www.davidc.net/sites/default/subnets/subnets.html

goback to azure portal

click + add subnet--
subnet name-- subnet-1
subnet address range -- 10.4.0.0/26
---click add
if u want to add more subnets---
click + add subnet---
name:subnet-2
subnet addr range-- 10.4.0.64/26
-----add

click next:security--
keeping everything disable for now.

next--
next--review + create
---click on create
click go to resource-- 

now,vns is usually the job of devops eng to create and maintain vns on the cloud.


VPN Gateways---
To connect this vn to any other n/w, we need to create a vpn gateway.
This vpn gateway is a special kind of vn gateway which is typically used tosend encrypted n/w traffic betw an
azure vn and on-premise resources over the public internet.

BUt it can also be used tosend data to azure mws.
Each vpn gateway supports multiple connecions to it, so that
u can connect multiple n/ws tothe same gateway.

When we deploy vn gateway, there are few things that happens--there are 2 virtual m/cs which get deployed.
they are hidden and u cnnt see them.These vms are deployed toagateway subnet that u specify during the gateway deployment.
And they contain the routing tablesandother gateway services.

Since, they are hidden and used only by azure,u canno configure the vm at all.
Now, when u deploy a gateway,azure asks what type of gateway is required?
Specifying a type of vpn tells azure that the gateway will be usd to create a typical vpn connection.
If u specify express route,then the gateway will be configured for an express route connection.
There are muliple types like ssite-to-site,point-to-site,express route and vNet Peering.

Site to Site Vpn--site to site vpn is used for connecting the resoures +nt in on-premise resource for connecting to
virtual nws.To deploy this kind ofconnection, u needtohave the vpn dvice,which is deployed onthe on-premise n/w.
this on premise vpn device should have a public vpn assigned to it. 




